v23.2.0-alpha.1 release notes (#17890)
cockroachdb/docs: src/current/_includes/releases/v23.2/v23.2.0-alpha.1.md

- When a deployment is configured to use a time zone (new feature) for log file output using formats `crdb-v1` or `crdb-v2`, it becomes impossible to process the new output log files using the [`cockroach debug merge-logs` command]({% link v23.2/cockroach-debug-merge-logs.md %}) from a previous version. The newest `cockroach debug merge-logs` code must be used instead. [#104265][#104265]
- When customizing the [SQL shell's interactive prompt]({% link v23.2/cockroach-sql.md %}), the special sequence `%M` now expands to the full host name instead of the combination of host name and port number. To include the port number explicitly, use `%>`. The special sequence `%m` now expands to the host name up to the first period. [#105137][#105137]
- The [`cockroach debug zip`]({% link v23.2/cockroach-debug-zip.md %}) command stores data retrieved from SQL tables in the remote cluster using the TSV format by default. [#107474][#107474]

<h3 id="v23-2-0-alpha-1-security-updates">Security updates</h3>

> - Users who have the [`CREATEROLE` role option]{% link v23.2/grant.md %} can now grant and revoke role membership in any non-admin role.  This change also removes the [`sql.auth.createrole_allows_grant_role_membership.enabled` cluster setting]({% link v23.2/cluster-settings.md %}), which was added in v23.1. In v23.2, the cluster setting is effectively always true. [#104376][#104376]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Users who have the [`CREATEROLE` role option]({% link v23.2/grant.md %}) can now grant and revoke role membership in any non-admin role.  This change also removes the [`sql.auth.createrole_allows_grant_role_membership.enabled` cluster setting]({% link v23.2/cluster-settings.md %}), which was added in v23.1. In v23.2, the cluster setting is effectively always true. [#104376][#104376]
```

- Added the built-in functions `bitmask_or`, `bitmask_and` and `bitmask_xor` for variable-length input bitwise `OR`, `AND`, and `XOR` operations, respectively. [#107863][#107863]
- The `oidvectortypes` built-in has been implemented, which can format `oidvector`. [#108467][#108467]
- Added support for executing SQL statements directly within PLpgSQL routines. Note that this currently only applies to the subset of statements that can be executed within SQL UDFs, so `CREATE TABLE` is not supported, for example. `INTO` syntax is also supported. For example, `SELECT * INTO a, b FROM xy;`. [#107920][#107920]
- A SQL client can now request strict atomicity for mixed DDL/DML transactions with the new session variable `strict_ddl_atomicity`, which defaults to `false`. When this variable is set to `true`, CockroachDB will refuse to accept processing those specific DDL statements inside `BEGIN...COMMIT` for which it cannot guarantee atomic processing (other DDL statements are still allowed). Note that schema changes implicit in certain operations (e.g., `IMPORT`) are not protected via the new mechanism and can still fail with `XXA00` errors. [#42063][#42063]

> - Fixed an issue where the UI was missing query text and details when looking at the SQL Activity [Transactions page]({% link v23.2/ui-transactions-page.md %}) if there was more than 500 transactions or statements. The `statement_activity` table now includes all statements for a transaction that are in the `transaction_activity` table. [#109424][#109424]

Reviewer 2: > Fixed an issue where the UI was

s/was/were/

- The default value for the `--max-sql-memory` parameter of the [`cockroach demo` command]({% link v23.2/cockroach-demo.md %}) has been increased from 128 MiB to 256 MiB. [#103642][#103642]
- Two new store metrics, `range.snapshots.cross-region.sent-bytes` and `range.snapshots.cross-region.rcvd-bytes`, were added to track the aggregate of snapshot bytes sent from and received at a store across different regions. Note that these metrics require the nodes' localities to include a “region” tier key. If a node lacks this key but is involved in cross-region batch activities, an error message will be logged. [#104111][#104111]
- Added new store metrics to track the aggregate of snapshot bytes sent from and received at a store across different zones.

  - `range.snapshots.cross-zone.sent-bytes`
  - `range.snapshots.cross-zone.rcvd-bytes`

   For accurate metrics, follow these recommendations:

  - Configure region and zone tier keys consistently across nodes.
  - Within a node locality, ensure unique region and zone tier keys.

>   - Maintain consistent configuration of region and zone tiers across nodes.

Reviewer 2: It's possible that this is how the commit should be mapped/formatted in the release notes?

But the notes for this one commit ([8f3e328a00a5d388a8cfd1664756c343e43a6d3b](https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/pull/104417/commits/8f3e328a00a5d388a8cfd1664756c343e43a6d3b))

Is getting shifted left / having multiple additional bullets (instead of it being nested until the main bullet for the PR)

![image](https://github.com/cockroachdb/docs/assets/3051672/545f1256-2f8b-4c36-8bdc-05ae425f4ff4)

Reviewer 2: update: okay, I see this happening for a few commits, so perhaps this is expected / fine.

Reviewer 3: There were some formatting issues but I think they are fixed now. PTAL again.

Reviewer 2: LGTM - thanks!

    ```yaml
    file-defaults:
        format: crdb-v2
        format-options: {timezone: america/new_york}
    ```

    Example logging output:

    ``` I230606 12:43:01.553407-040000 1 1@cli/start.go:575 ⋮ [n?] 4  soft memory limit of Go runtime is set to 35 GiB                        ^^^^^^^ indicates GMT-4 was used. ```

    The timezone offset is also always included in the format if it is not zero (e.g. for non-UTC time zones). This is necessary to ensure that the times can be read back precisely. [#104265][#104265]

- The command `cockroach debug merge-log` was adapted to understand time zones in input files read with format `crdb-v1` or `crdb-v2`. [#104265][#104265]
- When customizing the SQL interactive prompt, `%M` and `%m` now behave more like `psql` when connecting over a Unix datagram socket. [#105137][#105137]
- When `cockroach debug zip` is pointed at a cluster with virtualization enabled, data about virtual clusters is now stored in a `virtual` subdirectory rather than a `tenants` subdirectory. [#106117][#106117]
- The default value of the `--format` parameter to `cockroach debug zip` is `tsv`, like other CLI commands that can extract SQL data. [#107474][#107474]

> - The `debug.zip` now includes the `crdb_internal.probe_range` table with a limit of 100 rows to avoid the query from taking to long. [#107720][#107720]

Reviewer 2: > from taking to long

s/to/too/

- Fixed a bug where, in rare circumstances, a replication change could get stuck when proposed near lease or leadership changes, especially under overload, and the replica circuit breaker could trip. A previous attempt to fix this issue has been reverted in favor of this fix. [#106515][#106515]
- CockroachDB now automatically deletes statistics for dropped tables from the `system.table_statistics` table. [#105364][#105364]
- Fixed a rare internal error which occurs when a query uses a "project set" operation involving simple column expressions. [#104756][#104756]
- The [Raft]({% link v23.2/architecture/replication-layer.md %}#raft) `PreVote` and `CheckQuorum` mechanisms are now fully enabled. These prevent spurious elections when followers already have an active leader, and cause leaders to step down if they don't hear back from a quorum of followers. This improves reliability under partial and asymmetric network partitions, by avoiding spurious elections and preventing unavailability where a partially partitioned node could steal leadership away from an established leaseholder who would then no longer be able to reach the leader and submit writes. [#104042][#104042]

> - Fixed a bug that could produce incorrect values for [virtual computed columns]({% link v23.2/computed-columns.md %}) in rare cases. The bug only ocurred when the virtual column expression's type did not match the type of the virtual column. [#105736][#105736]

Reviewer 2: s/ocurred/occurred/

- The [Schema Insights page]({% link v23.2/ui-insights-page.md %}#schema-insights-tab) no longer times out. [#107292][#107292]
- The last SQL statement in a user-defined function with a `VOID` return type can now produce any number of columns of any type. This bug was present since UDFs were introduced in v22.2. [#108299][#108299]
- Fixed a bug that caused nodes to crash when attempting to `EXECUTE` a prepared statement with an argument that referenced a user-defined function. This bug was present since user-defined functions were introduced in v22.2. [#108213][#108213]
- Fixed a bug where a release [save point]({% link v23.2/savepoint.md %}) could incorrectly emit a "cannot publish new versions for descriptors" error instead of a retryable error to applications. [#108133][#108133]
- Users with the `VIEWACTIVITY` privilege now are able to see other users sessions from both the CLI and the DB Console. [#106590][#106590]
- Fixed a bug in [`cockroach demo`]({% link v23.2/cockroach-demo.md %}) whereby `\demo add` could sometimes crash with an error "`index out of range [...] with length ...`". This bug had been introduced in v19.x. [#108566][#108566]

> - Fixed a bug where the command `\demo decommission` in `cockroach demo` could sometime leave the demo cluster in a broken state. This bug had been introduced in v20.2. [#108566][#108566]

Reviewer 2: > could sometime leave

s/sometime/sometimes/

- Fixed a bug where certain SQL session variables meant to be hidden from introspection were showing up in `information_schema.session_variables`, which was incoherent with the handling in `pg_catalog.pg_settings`. [#109872][#109872]
- CockroachDB now properly handles RPC failures on writes using the parallel commit protocol that execute in parallel to the commit operation, avoiding incorrect retryable failures and `transaction unexpectedly committed` assertions by detecting when writes cannot be retried idempotently, instead returning an `AmbiguousResultError`. [#107658][#107658]
- Fixed a bug where dependencies on sequences from tables would be reported with the wrong value for the `classid` column in the `pg_catalog.pg_depend` table. [#110144][#110144]
- Two `ALTER RANGE default CONFIGURE ZONE` statements on the same line no longer displays an error. [#109774][#109774]
- Fixed a DB Console issue where the `DROP_UNUSED` index recommendations produced by the table details page produced an invalid `DROP INDEX` statement. [#110429][#110429]

> - Removed buggy [TTL]({% link v23.2/row-level-ttl.md %}) descriptor repair. Previously, upgrading from v22.2.X to v23.1.9 incorrectly removed TTL storage parameters from tables (visible by running a `SHOW CREATE TABLE <ttl-table>;` statment) while attempting to repair table descriptors. This resulted in the node that attempted to run the TTL job crashing due to a panic caused by the missing TTL storage parameters. [#110364][#110364]

Reviewer 2: s/statment/statement/

- Fixed a bug introduced when the `ChartCatalog` API endpoint was introduced, where the endpoint did not correctly report the unit of metrics. [#109042][#109042]
- Fixed a bug that could occur when the "multiple active portals" execution mode (Preview) was enabled to evaluate queries such as lookup joins. The bug could result in an internal error like `unexpected 40960 leftover bytes` if the portal was not fully consumed. [#110625][#110625]
- Fixed a bug where an `ALTER TABLE ... ADD CONSTRAINT CHECK ...` statement that utilized a user-defined function in the `CHECK` could cause a validation error. [#110130][#110130]
- Fixed a bug where `RESET (ttl_expire_after)` could incorrectly remove `ttl_expiration_expression`. [#110252][#110252]
- Fixed a bug where the `format_type` builtin did not honor `typemod` information for array types, leading to incorrect output. [#110900][#110900]

> - Fixed a bug introduced in v22.2 that incorrectly allowed users without the `EXECUTE` privilege to execute a a user-defined function. [#107587][#107587]

Reviewer 2: > without the `EXECUTE` privilege to execute a a user-defined function

nit: remove duplicate "a"

- There is now a `CREATEDB` system privilege, which is analogous to the existing `CREATEDB` role option, but can also be inherited by role membership. [#110220][#110220]
- There is now a `CONTROLJOB` system privilege, which is analogous to the existing `CONTROLJOB` role option, but can also be inherited by role membership. [#110220][#110220]
- The `persistedsqlstats` table maximum size check is now done once an hour instead of every 10 minutes. This reduces the risk of serialization errors on the statistics tables. [#110173][#110173]
- The new [cluster setting](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/{{ page.version.version }}/cluster-settings) `sql.txn.read_committed_syntax.enabled`, controls whether transactions run under `READ COMMITTED` or `SERIALIZABLE` isolation. It defaults to false. When set to true, the following statements will configure transactions to run under READ COMMITTED isolation:

  - `BEGIN TRANSACTION ISOLATION LEVEL READ COMMITTED`
  - `SET TRANSACTION ISOLATION LEVEL READ COMMITTED`
  - `SET default_transaction_isolation = 'read committed'`
  - `SET SESSION CHARACTERISTICS AS TRANSACTION ISOLATION LEVEL READ COMMITTED`
  -
  [#110624][#110624]

> - The [cluster setting](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/{{ page.version.version }}/cluster-settings) `sql.metrics.statement_details.gateway_node.enabled` now defaults to false, to reduce the number of rows generated in SQL Statistics pages. [#107788][#107788]

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
- The [cluster setting](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/cluster-settings) `sql.metrics.statement_details.gateway_node.enabled` now defaults to false, to reduce the number of rows generated in SQL Statistics pages. [#107788][#107788]
```

- The impact of high concurrency blind writes to the same key on goroutine scheduling latency was reduced. [#109349][#109349]
- [Changefeeds]({% link v23.2/change-data-capture-overview.md %}) to Webhook or Pub/Sub endpoints now support much higher throughput [#109351][#109351]
- This release improved the cost of resolving a user-defined enum type that has many values. [#109394][#109394]
- Queries that compare collated strings now use less memory and may execute faster. [#110066][#110066]
- Added a scheduler based rangefeed processor which improves rangefeed and changefeed performance for very large tables. The new processor is disabled by default, but can be enabled by setting `kv.rangefeed.scheduler.enabled` cluster setting to `true`. [#107553][#107553]
- This release disables `sql.defaults.zigzag_join.enabled` by default. [#110214][#110214]

<h3 id="v23-2-0-alpha-1-build-changes">Build changes</h3>

- Go has been upgraded to 1.20.8. [#109773][#109773]

> - The top-level `Makefile` was replaced by a stub `GNUmakefile` which defers its behavior to `dev`. The common targets `make [all]`, `make test` and `make install` remain for compatibility with most UNIX installation guides. The previous make rules remain available via `make -C build/GNUmakefile.obsolete ...`. [#84565][#84565]

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- The top-level `Makefile` was replaced by a stub `GNUmakefile` which defers its behavior to `dev`. The common targets `make [all]`, `make test`, and `make install` remain for compatibility with most UNIX installation guides. The previous `make` rules remain available via `make -C build/GNUmakefile.obsolete ...`. [#84565][#84565]
```

- There is now a `CREATEDB` system privilege, which is analogous to the existing `CREATEDB` role option, but can also be inherited by role membership. [#110220][#110220]
- There is now a `CONTROLJOB` system privilege, which is analogous to the existing `CONTROLJOB` role option, but can also be inherited by role membership. [#110220][#110220]
- The `persistedsqlstats` table maximum size check is now done once an hour instead of every 10 minutes. This reduces the risk of serialization errors on the statistics tables. [#110173][#110173]

> - The new [cluster setting](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/{{ page.version.version }}/cluster-settings) `sql.txn.read_committed_syntax.enabled`, controls whether transactions run under `READ COMMITTED` or `SERIALIZABLE` isolation. It defaults to false. When set to true, the following statements will configure transactions to run under READ COMMITTED isolation:

Reviewer: Why are we using the full link here? prior to the liquid? (Sorry if I missed something about this.)

Reviewer 4: @kathancox The full link will make less work for me later on when we split the releases into its own Netlify site. We'll need to use full links between each docs page so that htmltest doesn't break.

Aside from that, the link will fail htmltest anyway, because of the Liquid. Proposing this instead:

```suggestion
- The new [cluster setting](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/v23.2/cluster-settings) `sql.txn.read_committed_syntax.enabled`, controls whether transactions run under `READ COMMITTED` or `SERIALIZABLE` isolation. It defaults to false. When set to true, the following statements will configure transactions to run under READ COMMITTED isolation:
```

> - The new [cluster setting](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/{{ page.version.version }}/cluster-settings) `sql.txn.read_committed_syntax.enabled`, controls whether transactions run under `READ COMMITTED` or `SERIALIZABLE` isolation. It defaults to false. When set to true, the following statements will configure transactions to run under READ COMMITTED isolation:

Reviewer: code formatting for `READ COMMITTED` and `false`

  - `BEGIN TRANSACTION ISOLATION LEVEL READ COMMITTED`
  - `SET TRANSACTION ISOLATION LEVEL READ COMMITTED`
  - `SET default_transaction_isolation = 'read committed'`
  - `SET SESSION CHARACTERISTICS AS TRANSACTION ISOLATION LEVEL READ COMMITTED`

>   -

Reviewer: There's an additional bullet point here that is throwing off the rendering.

  [#110624][#110624]

- The [cluster setting](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/{{ page.version.version }}/cluster-settings) `sql.metrics.statement_details.gateway_node.enabled` now defaults to false, to reduce the number of rows generated in SQL Statistics pages. [#107788][#107788]

> - The default value for the `ttl_job_cron` table storage parameter is now `@daily` rather than `@hourly`.This parameter controls the default recurrence of the row-level TTL job. As part of this change, the output of the `SHOW CREATE TABLE` statements now includes the `ttl_cron_job` parameter if only if it is explicitly set. [#110623][#110623]

Reviewer: Space missing after the period following "`@hourly`"

Reviewer: Correction to typo:

> As part of this change, the output of the `SHOW CREATE TABLE` statements now includes the `ttl_cron_job` parameter only if it is explicitly set.

Reviewer: And maybe link the `ttl_job_cron` to `row-level-ttl.md`?

- Exposed a new metric `storage.compactions.duration`, computed by the storage engine, that provides the cumulative time the storage engine has spent in compactions. This duration may exceed time elapsed, because of concurrent compactions, and may be useful in monitoring compaction concurrency. [#103670][#103670]
- The default value for the `--max-sql-memory` parameter of the [`cockroach demo` command]({% link v23.2/cockroach-demo.md %}) has been increased from 128 MiB to 256 MiB. [#103642][#103642]
- Two new store metrics, `range.snapshots.cross-region.sent-bytes` and `range.snapshots.cross-region.rcvd-bytes`, were added to track the aggregate of snapshot bytes sent from and received at a store across different regions. Note that these metrics require the nodes' localities to include a “region” tier key. If a node lacks this key but is involved in cross-region batch activities, an error message will be logged. [#104111][#104111]
- Added new store metrics to track the aggregate of snapshot bytes sent from and received at a store across different zones.

  - `range.snapshots.cross-zone.sent-bytes`
  - `range.snapshots.cross-zone.rcvd-bytes`

>    For accurate metrics, follow these recommendations:

Reviewer: This isn't quite rendering properly. I think the "For accurate..." sentence needs to bump in a tab one more. and the same for the points following

Reviewer: It is affecting the release notes that follow this one too.

- When cluster virtualization is enabled, a selection box displays in DB Console Metrics pages when you are connected to the system interface, and allows you to view metrics for a specific virtual cluster. [#103308][#103308]
- When cluster virtualization is enabled, a selection box displays on custom charts and allows you to select a specific virtual cluster. [#103780][#103780]
- Renamed "recent executions" to "active executions" in the UI. [#103784][#103784]
- The [Changefeed Dashboard]({% link v23.2/ui-cdc-dashboard.md %}) has been updated with new graphs to track backfill progress, protected timestamps age, and the number of schema registry registrations. [#101790][#101790]
- A new **Networking** tab has been added to the DB Console metrics dashboard. Metrics for network bytes sent and received are now displayed in the **Networking** tab rather than the **Hardware** tab. In addition, the following metrics have been added:

  - `cr.node.round-trip-latency-p50`
  - `cr.node.round-trip-latency-p99`
  - `cr.node.rpc.connection.unhealthy`

  [#104394][#104394]

> - When cluster virtualization is enabled, a no data empty graph state has been added when switching to a virtual cluster with no data. [#103971][#103971]

Reviewer: Maybe in quotes, or maybe in bold, to make it easier to read that.

>  a "no data empty graph" state

    [#101352][#101352]

- CockroachDB now prevents setting `max_range_size` below the `COCKROACH_MIN_RANGE_MAX_BYTES` environment variable, which defaults to 64 MiB (half of the default minimum range size). [#96725][#96725]

> - Fixed a bug that could occasionally cause schema change jobs, such as table or index drops, to appear stuck in state "waiting for MVCC GC" for much longer than expected. The fix only applies to future schema changes; to process existing stuck jobs, manually force-enqueue the relevant ranges in the MVCC GC queue from the DB Console's [Advanced Debug](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/{{ page.version.version }}/ui-debug-pages) page. [#110078][#110078]

Reviewer: The second sentence here, I would maybe break up:

> The fix only applies to future schema changes. To process existing stuck jobs, manually force-enqueue the relevant ranges in the MVCC GC queue from the DB Console's [Advanced Debug](https://www.cockroachlabs.com/docs/{{ page.version.version }}/ui-debug-pages) page.

Reviewer 4: Additionally, `s/{{ page.version.version }}/v23.2/g`.

- Fixed a bug introduced when the `ChartCatalog` API endpoint was introduced, where the endpoint did not correctly report the unit of metrics. [#109042][#109042]
- Fixed a bug that could occur when the "multiple active portals" execution mode (Preview) was enabled to evaluate queries such as lookup joins. The bug could result in an internal error like `unexpected 40960 leftover bytes` if the portal was not fully consumed. [#110625][#110625]
- Fixed a bug where an `ALTER TABLE ... ADD CONSTRAINT CHECK ...` statement that utilized a user-defined function in the `CHECK` could cause a validation error. [#110130][#110130]
- Fixed a bug where `RESET (ttl_expire_after)` could incorrectly remove `ttl_expiration_expression`. [#110252][#110252]
- Fixed a bug where the `format_type` builtin did not honor `typemod` information for array types, leading to incorrect output. [#110900][#110900]

> - Fixed a bug introduced in v22.2 that incorrectly allowed users without the `EXECUTE` privilege to execute a a user-defined function [#107587][#107587]

Reviewer: Missing period at end of the note here.

- Added a scheduler based rangefeed processor which improves rangefeed and changefeed performance for very large tables. The new processor is disabled by default, but can be enabled by setting `kv.rangefeed.scheduler.enabled` cluster setting to `true`. [#107553][#107553]
- This release disables `sql.defaults.zigzag_join.enabled` by default. [#110214][#110214]

<h3 id="v23-2-0-alpha-1-build-changes">Build changes</h3>

- Go has been upgraded to 1.20.8. [#109773][#109773]

> - The top-level `Makefile` was replaced by a stub `GNUmakefile` which defers its behavior to `dev`. The common targets `make [all]`, `make test` and `make install` remain for compatibility with most UNIX installation guides. The previous make rules remain available via `make -C build/GNUmakefile.obsolete ...`. [#84565][#84565]

Reviewer: Serial comma add here and inline code on `make`:

> The common targets `make [all]`, `make test`, and `make install` remain for compatibility with most UNIX installation guides. The previous `make` rules remain available via `make -C build/GNUmakefile.obsolete ...`.

[fc5920459]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/commit/fc5920459
[fedb692ae]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/commit/fedb692ae
[fef97d93c]: https://github.com/cockroachdb/cockroach/commit/fef97d93c

> {% comment %}Only in new hash{% endcomment %}

Reviewer: To delete?

Reviewer 3: Yeah before merging. This is to help reviewers and @celiala to verify that I got all the relevant commits for the updated hash.
